you might have seen news reports telling
Americans that they ought to continue
eating meat including the most unhelpful
varieties like sausage and hot dogs and
bacon what's this about previously on
x-men absolutely by definition any evil
whatsoever
can be justified by this equation now
net happiness think about the meaning of
the word net it's like net profit okay
so net profit you earn a certain amount
of money and it costs you a certain
amount you lose a certain amount of
money so you subtract the losses from
the profits and what do you get you get
the net net net income net profit what
not okay in this same way you're talking
about some a positive quantity of
happiness or well-being and then
subtracting the misery the harm the
torture the suffering you inflict
whatever it might be any evil whatsoever
can be justified this way including
killing cows in order to eat their flesh
there's there's no end do it okay well a
private company called nutria Rex
published some articles in the annals of
internal medicine and some of the
articles were meta analyses which were
nothing new except that they combined
the results of prior studies that
confirm that indeed if you reduce meat
consumption you reduce your risk of
cancer and heart attacks and stroke and
diabetes but then they also published a
study that said that if you ask
omnivores what do they think about meat
they say they like it for some it's
important to them so the conclusion they
arrived at and I am NOT making this up
was that the benefit of reducing cancer
risk and heart attack risk and stroke
risk and diabetes just isn't worth it if
it means reducing meat any evil
whatsoever can be justified this way
including killing cows in order to eat
their flesh there's there's no end do it
ok ok so I think that we need to be
really careful and we're talking about
the difference between any evil could be
justified and any evil is justified ok I
think that one thing that eyes L is
criticizing
and one thing where you know he and I
are absolutely the same page about is
that people often engage in utilitarian
reasoning to justify really bad behavior
so the point is that for all these
ethical theories there are ways that we
could miss apply them to real life cases
in order to make it seem like we're
justifying really bad things but once we
actually look at the real world it's
just not going to be the case that
eating cows is going to be justified by
utility calculus what is it that makes a
philosophical argument good or useful or
worthwhile out here in the real world
not on a chalkboard in a university
classroom not when you're trying to get
an a-plus on an academic exam I'd say
off the top of my head
salience sincerity helpfulness all right
salience when we philosophize what we're
saying has to really be salient to the
person we're speaking to to the
situation we're speaking to can't be
irrelevant and if this guy's case that's
one of my big complaints about him is
that he will just invent and errors and
ascribe them to me that have nothing to
do with my argument that have nothing to
do with what I'm saying
he will stop me in mid-sentence and say
well I don't know if he's saying this
but let's pretend that he is so I can
show off that I have book-learning
relevant to this other problem that's in
no way salient to what he actually said
or the point he's making it where it's
gone certain salience salience is a big
one it's a big factor here sincerity is
it really possible that this guy is
sincere when he says that he's just
never heard of utilitarian arguments
being made to justify killing cows tea
meat he's just never heard this he
claims to be a vegan and from fall
downwards this is
the totally unthinkable notion that
there were people out there on the
sidewalks doing interviews with vegan
activists that are recorded and uploaded
to YouTube there are people talking
about the ethics of meat eating and
they'll say to you straight to your face
well you know it's true eating meat is
bad for the environment and it causes
all the suffering animals and it
probably shortens your lifespan
increases your chance of getting a heart
attack in cancer zone but nevertheless
when they think in terms of the pleasure
pain calculus the brutal terms used by
John Stuart Mill for this when they
think in terms of their own felicity
their own enjoyment their own pleasure
their own utility nevertheless eating
meat is in their minds justified the
harm of being done just doesn't measure
up to their enjoyment of it and hey tell
you this but PCRM is in court right now
I just played you guys a few short
snippets neal barnard talking about that
PCRM is pressing a case that may
ultimately end up in court some kind of
lawsuit against a peer-reviewed journal
so step one is going to the editors
going to the universities but probably
steps two and three it may go past the
University Ombudsman end up in a court
of law um they are challenging an
article that claimed in exactly this way
that the health benefits of reducing
meat so this is not even a vegan diet
not even eliminating meat they claim the
health benefits of reducing the amount
of meat you eat justify the loss of
pleasure the loss of felicity the loss
of enjoyment and they have social
science research to prove it of couse
you can if you go out and interview a
whole bunch of cocaine addicts and say
to them hey are you aware that cocaine
is bad for your health yeah are you
aware that it's bad for you know your
economic future that you're likely to
die in poverty you're much more likely
because you're using cocaine they say
yeah you can talk them over through it's
okay so now you know on a scale of one
to ten the harm being done in your life
by cocaine and then how much pleasure
you get out of it and do you plan to
continue using cocaine and they'll tell
you they're crackheads they're going
keep on being crackheads alcoholics are
gonna keep on being alcoholics they're
not doing this blind you think in the
21st century alcoholics believe whiskey
is good for their health you think
anyone doesn't know that vodka causes
brain damage really you think they don't
know that alcohol causes damage to an
unborn fetus and so on and women keep
drinking alcohol during pregnancy in the
21st century and they can sit down and
give you an interview and think in
purely utilitarian terms yeah this is
the real world this isn't just something
on a chalkboard in the university
classroom this is the horrifying
disturbing truth of being alive on
planet Earth in 2019 is that people in
their millions will justify any evil
cocaine alcohol red meat the murder of
cows the decimation of the rainforest
ecological devastation you name it they
will justify that in terms of their own
pleasure and this historical tradition
this philosophical tradition this
ethical and political tradition John
Stuart Mill was a member of parliament
you know Bentham and mill these were
political figures not just philosophical
figures and he that's always been true
of philosophy going right back to
Socrates Socrates was a political figure
and a religious figure and contest
a philosophical figure this is not just
in the parlor rooms is not just in
university classrooms okay the political
movement that is utilitarianism the
philosophical tendency and method of the
pleasure pain calculus yeah this is part
and parcel of what we're dealing with
here in the real world when vegans have
to stand up and say hey there are things
that matter
more than your enjoyment okay in the in
the same way that we have to challenge
all kinds of other evils in human
history that people are attached to that
evils that have become so familiar
through their cultural upbringing that
they're not perceived as evils at all
choices that people don't even think
they're making because they never even
thought they had a choice they didn't
grow up choosing between a vegan diet
and a meat-eating diet they just grew up
with food the way their grandmother made
it for them they just grew up being told
have another drink of whiskey it will do
you good and not questioning what does
it mean for whiskey to do me good it's
doing you brain damage but you perceive
that brain damage as relaxing and
millions of people's lives are destroyed
by it
alright this is not hyperbole okay so
for you to come on camera again lack of
salience lack of sincerity maybe it's
just lack of intelligence but once we
actually look at the real world it's
just not going to be the case that
eating cows is going to be justified by
utility calculus did you think that
sounded intelligent do you where did
that come from where did it come from
your self confident assertion that
nobody would ever justify killing cows
to eat meat in terms of utilitarian
calculus in terms of pleasure versus the
harm done that is in court right now
PCRM is press the case right now
absurdly enough against a peer-reviewed
scientific paper making precisely that
argument so the conclusion they arrived
at and I am NOT making this up
was that the benefit of reducing cancer
risk and heart attack risk and stroke
risk and diabetes just isn't worth it if
it means reducing meat in millions of
people around the world make the same
argument informally in their kitchens
parents talking to their children where
the children are vegan and the parents
are still eating meat on the sidewalks
vegan activist talking a stranger all
around the world sure this is a major
philosophical question people deal with
in real life and your response to it
shows the extent to which your
experience in academia getting a
master's degree now getting a PhD Erin
the extent to which this has divorced
you from the reality of what philosophy
is all about what it always has been
about since Socrates okay if you're
gonna do this thing if you're going to
be a public intellectual on on YouTube
and I encourage you to do so maybe when
you've done 500 videos when you've done
a thousand videos you'll be better at
this okay you've got to keep it salient
you've got to keep it sincere and you've
got to keep it helpful
what is helpfulness about is at the core
of philosophy because philosophy
ultimately is a problem-solving method
right philosophy is not about who has
more citations me or you right it's not
about who can use more jargon me or you
you recognize what the problem is
whether it's the problem the other
person is suffering with directly or a
problem on a social scale or maybe a
problem on a more metaphysical abstract
level but whatever you recognize what
the problem is and then you present your
arguments in a way that's helpful okay
and it's a struggle for me okay
I didn't make this video three days ago
cuz three days ago I was at the gym I
went to the gym three times on one day I
was all pumped up dealing with a back
injury I've had all kinds of problems
and I knew I was gonna sound angry as
hell if I got on camera
there's point of sorry when it's gay
it's not always that easy for me to
sound helpful okay the problem of
utilitarianism and its consequences in
our life in our political culture right
now that's a real problem to grapple
with and I would encourage you to come
back on camera and talk about this in a
more sincere in a more salient and
ultimately in a more helpful way because
it's not about who's right and who's
wrong you were me right it's about what
kind of society do you want to have in
the future and what are you willing to
do to get it in the next five years
people like to disrespect my truth but
the fact is that you know my name is I
don't know